---
layout: ride_report
num: 12
ride_date: 08-10-25
bike: Bombora
tire: 40c
distance: 70
---

Long ride today that blended "wet feet", my usual lexington-concord loop, and the [MIT cycling route](https://cycling.mit.edu/routes/) out to Harvard, MA. 

It was a nice day throughout, and I took it fairly relaxed, with various stops for water and food in Lexington, Concord, Harvard. I like a route that goes through towns periodically to make it easy to stop and refuel. 

The ride wound up being a most of the day affair, which I don't mind. I started from Kismet and brought along a coffee and pastry for the first segment of the ride. There's a few parts of the wet feet dirt that feel really good -- fun and flowy. Someday I will get more into mountain bike things; I'm sure I'd enjoy.  

In Concord, I stopped at Haute for another pastry and breakfast sandwich. 

The Concord - Harvard part of the ride was new to me, based on the MIT route. It was a road segment which feels relaxed after riding lots of chunkier dirt and gravel. The segment did have a fair bit of climbing ups and downs though. Overall that region is really pretty -- somewhere in the boundary of suburban and rural. Plenty of ponds with spots for "turtle crossing" (I didn't see any) and roadside farm stands. Riding on roads out there reminds me of some of the riding I did growing up -- Mead lane and the like. Even though you're on the road, the roads are quiet and there's plenty of nature to see. 

There's lots of time to think on a long ride. I stopped and made a few short videos TikTok videos along the way. Maybe that's my new thing; it's a combination that makes some sense, though I certainly need to bring along a power bank next time. My phone died less than halfway into the ride.

On the way home, I rode by the sunflowers again, and more of them had bloomed. It's funny how they all face the same direction. According to [the internet](https://www.ucdavis.edu/curiosity/news/why-sunflowers-face-east), grown sunflowers all face east, the direction the sun rises. I was also thinking about how I should learn more about the Battle Road trail. [Here is a link](https://www.nps.gov/mima/planyourvisit/the-battle-road-trail.htm) which explains: 

> The Battle Road Trail is a five mile trail connecting historic sites from Meriam’s Corner in Concord to the eastern boundary of the park in Lexington. Much of the trail follows the original remnants of the Battle Road where thousands of Colonial Militia and British Regulars fought a bloody engagement on April 19, 1775. In some areas the trail leaves the historic road to follow the route of the Minute Men traversing farming fields, wetlands, and forests.

There's lots to learn about that whole park [here](https://www.nps.gov/mima/index.htm), so I will have to investigate more someday. 

