---
layout: ride_report
num: 28
ride_date: 04-19-26
bike: 3T Ultra GRX
tire: 40c
distance: 44
---

After a few days at the farm, it was time to head back to Girona. We left a day early in hopes of avoiding an incoming storm, and wound up with a nice weather day. 

There's a satisfaction in the process of packing up camp, making everything nice and tidy again. Here is a final photo of the masia and the farmdog, Tro, as we were getting ready to head off.

{% include image.html src="/figs/ride_reports/28/img1.jpg" alt="Tro at the farm" %}

Tro was a constant source of interest while we were hanging at the farm -- a real working dog with a personality quite different from a lot of the domestic dogs I usually interact with. He was always around, nearby, but had little interest (and sometimes active disinterest) in being touched or petted. He seemed to really enjoy his work, helping to care for the sheep and goats, when called upon to do it. 

The ride back was quite smooth--almost all slightly downhill and therefore much easier than the ride out (aside from a brief bit of climbing at the start). Since I am usually riding a loop at home, it was intesting to have a day that was almost all easy and downhill. Even a few degrees of conistent downhill can yield a huge difference in energy expense compared to the opposite. 

{% include image.html src="/figs/ride_reports/28/img2.jpg" alt="Riding out of a tunnel" %}

We stopped early in Les Preses to pick up some food and coffee, and had a nice rotisserie chicken meal in a parking lot. 

{% include image.html src="/figs/ride_reports/28/img5.jpg" alt="Rotisserie chicken break at Les preses" %}

It was a Sunday and so there were a handful more people out and about on the Carrilet greenway than on our way in. We saw a lot of folks on mountain bike-y type setups, so I imagine the greenway must be a nice way to get to some other MTB type trails. The whole ride is quite nice though; I love when you can get somewhere totally new by bike, while also being almost entirely off the road. 

{% include image.html src="/figs/ride_reports/28/img3.jpg" alt="Woods near girona (i think)" %}

{% include image.html src="/figs/ride_reports/28/img4.jpg" alt="Forest somewhere along the way" %}
