---
layout: ride_report
num: 7
ride_date: 07-27-25
bike: Bombora
tire: 40c
distance: 40
---

"Light northern gravel" again. Preceded by coffee and Formaggio bbq. 

I stopped in the forest in Middlesex fells and wrote in my journal, thinking about projects that have been in my head, and I'd like to take on someday. 

I found some better routes around the confusing sections of this ride. It'd be nice to add them into my computer maybe. 

I thought about how it would be nice to design a bike computer that was oriented around exploration and serendipity, rather than performance, optimization, and "stats"; something that didn't disconnect you too much from the world, but encouraged you to be more closely connected and exploratory. 

In Breakneck, I stopped for a while at the beach and ate my corn muffin and biscuit left over from the bbq. The route through that reservation is nice; paved, car-free roads through forest. I wondered about the difference between a "meadow" and "clearing" in a forest. 

At Lynn woods, I deviated from the route, and tried going around the pond the other way, following a trail. I rode over some deeper gravel, which my tires sunk into; I had to keep my weight back to make progress. The trail turned into some pretty chunky single track; I made it a ways without much issue, but eventually had to walk and carry my bike, and decided to turn back. I thought about the value in being able to authentically say, "well, that was a good experiment" and turn back happily when something doesn't work out. 

I chased a road rider on the Northern Strand trail a while and felt pretty good; maybe someday I'll get a road bike again. 