---
layout: post
title: "Genuary 2024"
date: 2023-12-28
latex: true
mathjax: true
comments: true
tag: ["art"]
---

In this post, I will document my results for [genuary 2024](https://genuary.art/prompts). My plan is to take no more than 1 hour per sketch, and share whatever I wind up with. I may also share some little written reflections as I go.

## January 1 - "Particles, lots of them"

<div id="jan-1"></div>
<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/p5.js/0.6.1/p5.min.js"></script>
<script src="{{ base.url | prepend: site.url }}/assets/2023-12-28-genuary-2024/jan1.js"></script>

This turned out as something like a galaxy? (not necessarily my original intent) I was thinking today about the evocative power of simple bits of motion. I think I want to play with using movement and animation more.

## January 2 - "No palettes"

My concept for today involves some abstraction of bees and flowers to create procedural colors.

Here is the process:

- Create a bunch of 'flowers' at random locations on the canvas with:
  - A given hue (in the HSB(A) sense)
  - A location on the canvas
  - A given lifetime
- Over a flower's lifetime, it grows in size until "death", when it "scatters" its seeds as new flowers in the same area.
- Create a bunch of "bees" at random locations on the canvas.
- Bees fly around randomly and "pollinate" flowers.
- This means that bees store the hue of the last flower they visited. When they visit the next flower, they "pollinate" it, meaning that they share with it the hue of the last flower it visited.
- When a flower "dies", it chooses the hues for its seeds based on some combination of its own hue, and the hue of the flowers that pollinated it.
- To get the hue of a seed:
  - Average your hue with a random pollinated hue
  - Add some random "mutations.

<div id="jan-2"></div>
<script src="{{ base.url | prepend: site.url }}/assets/2023-12-28-genuary-2024/jan2.js"></script>
