---
layout: note
num: 10
---

Learning is a lot about patience.

If you don't understand something, the solution is often to slow down.

Break the confusing down further into its pieces. Go back to the definitions. What does that word mean? How is that concept defined?

If doing that is not clarifying, what if you go _even slower_? Try breaking it down _even further_. What does that part of that part mean? What do the concepts mean that define that other one?

This works particularly well for technical topics, like math, computers and so on. Why? Because these types of topics are built in exactly the kind of way to reward this kind of going slow, breaking it down. In these areas, if you break it down far enough, if you are patient enough, you always ground out in something that is extremely clear, extremely precise, that "fits together" in an explicit, inevitable sort of way.

But this approach doesn't work too badly in other intellectual venues either -- even in cases where you don't know what you're trying to do at all. 

I find that when I am not sure what to do next in my ressearch, it's often due to a kind of impatience. An unwillingness to step back and break things down again. *What am I trying to say, exactly? What is it exactly, that I need to work out here? What are all the pieces of that and how do they fix together?*

If I can conjure the patience to do this work of clarification -- iterating until some clarity is reached -- then it is often clear what needs to be done next.

This recognition has implications for the type of work mindset that is most likely to be productive. For example, I find that tight deadlines or fears about accomplishment engender impatience, insecurity, and an unwillingness to engage in the breaking it down process. 

* Impatience: "I don't have time for this! I can't break that down _and then_ break that down! There's no time! We need to figure it out now!" 
* Insecurity: there can be fear that I won't be able to follow the path all the way down and back -- it's too far, it's too complicated. Better not to even try and just stay on the surface instead.

There's a lot of value in intellectual spaciousness.
