---
layout: note
num: 11
---

I enjoy watching videos of creative people creating with excitement and freedom.

Music is a great venue for this since it's so immediate and emotional. For example [here's one](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oAXxv-SYI2I&ab_channel=OV-Beats) that pops up on my feed periodically.

What does it look like to apply this kind of freedom and vibrance to the intellectual world of ideas. How does it feel to explore ideas with openness, curiosity, excitement? 

The challenge with intellectuality for me is that it's so easy to be evaluative & critical -- ideas / arguments can be good or bad, logical or not etc. Every idea can be critiqued. A lot of formal education is training in critical thinking of various forms. 

Of course there's clearly value in critical thinking; but also, what do we miss -- intellectually, emotionally -- by applying critique too much or too soon? 

Here's another partially formed bit I wrote on this theme: 

> Against this background, I've been thinking a lot about what I'll call "intellectual joy". For me, a unique sort of intellectual joy comes from wondering, experimenting with ideas, learning, and following my curiosity without agenda. I like to read something new that stretches my brain to think about something from a completely different perspective -- even if it is a perspective that seems clearly "wrong" or "lacking rigor" from another point of view. I like to try to understand ideas, and connect them with others. I also like to try walking down new intellectual pathways. If I try on this idea, what will happen? What if I make something (in code, in visual design, in electronics) that does something I haven't seen before? Will it be interesting? What will I be able to see or understand after I've done it? It's the attitude of "play", the willingness to engage with [what is useless](https://www.avabear.xyz/p/in-praise-of-uselessness).

> Of course, there is a certain satisfaction in refining and clarifying ideas too -- doing "rigorous", "serious" work. But it's a different sort of thing. It's more like the pleasure of a hard job well done.

> Anyway, I've been thinking lately about how little "intellectual joy" is really centered in the life of being an academic.
