---
layout: note
num: 12
---

I'm interested in models of effort and "accomplishing things" that don't involve "forcing it" or mindlessley pushing through internal discomfort or resistance.

One of my yoga teachers talks about a version of this. The idea for making progress in a posture is something like: 

1. Go as far as you can into the posture comfortably
2. At some point, you will encounter resistance from your body, which often comes with some alarm or tension or reactive fuss -- "Stop! I can't go any farther!". 
3. When this happens: stop, and relax near the edge. Sit with and listen to the discomfort or reaction or tension. Relax into it. 
4. Eventually, when your body has calmed enough at this point of resistance, you may find that you can go deeper into the pose. (Or maybe not). 

Not that "progress" is always or ever the goal in many things. But in this way of thinking, I'm interested in how growth comes not from "forcing it" or pushing thoruhg tension but from the opposite -- by *relaxing* at the point of resistance. 

Another similar discussion of this kind of idea comes from *Zen in the Art of Archery*. It's been a while since I read it, but a quote I think of sometimes: 

> What stands in your way is that you have a much too willful will. **You think that what you do not do yourself does not happen**.

What this quote highlights for me is that there's a connection between the "forcing it" model and notions of agency and ego. There is a sense that if *I* don't express my agency and push my way through the discomfort, then the desired thing will not happen. But that's not necessarily true. 

