---
layout: note
num: 13
---

Some strategies for managing my phone and the time I spend on it:

1. **Time-release lock box**: a box where I can put my phone, and then lock for a specified amount of time. This is a way to pre-commit to not using my phone for a period of time. 
    * The main way that I like to use this is to put my phone in it an hour or two before I am planning to head to bed. I then lock it for something like 2 + (sleep hours) + 2 hours. 
    * The idea is that my phone will not be available both in the period right before bed, or in the period right when I wake up. For me, these are high impact moments to stay off my phone. 
    * I have a standalone alarm clock for telling the time in my bedroom or waking me up if necessary. 

2. **Apple Watch**: I've been experimenting with replacing my phone with an apple watch in many situations. 
    * Managing screentime by adding another screen may seem odd; however, the main appeal of the apple watch for me is that it is a far less intrusive and distracting device. 
    * Moreover, it *does* have the ability to do most of the fuctional & non-distracting things that my phone can do. I got the version that's has cell connection. So as a standalone, it can: 
        * **Send / receive texts** (texting is a bit annoying though which is fine for me since I don't want to be doing it that much anyway)
        * **Get directions / maps**. Only apple maps though. 
        * **Listen to spotify**. 
        * **Google basic things** (only through siri). 
        * **Take notes**. 
        * **Tell the time**. 
    * What it can't do is distracting things like TikTok or social media.
    * One valuable phone feature the watch doesn't have is a camera. I do enjoy being able to record videos or take photos sometimes. To address this, I sometimes carry a GoPro.

If there are other phone management strategies that you have found useful, let me know. 