---
layout: note
num: 17
---

Some draft principles for a pluralistic, participatory model of quantitative social science and statistical analysis. This is a work in progress. 

1. Data analysis should speak *with* and not *for* (or on behalf of) communities. Against the use of knowledge for control. Against technocracy.

2. **Contestability**. All quantitative knowledge should be "contestable", especially by the communities that it most directly affects. 

2. **Co-design**. Work with communities and those directly affected to define measures and interventions. 

3. **Transparency**, public review. General principles of open science.

4. **Tolerance for messiness, and politics**. Against the quantitative analysis for de-politicization. Inspirations: James Scott; Data Feminism. 

5. **Pragmatism**. "Facts" and knowledge claims are held loosely, and always up for debate and re-negotiation. 
    * Knowledge and data analysis should never decisively move decisions outside the bounds of political discourse. 
    * Quantitative measures should not be "naturalized" as *the* (only) way to represent complex, normative concepts like "value" or "effectiveness", "efficiency" etc.

6. **Understand the limits** of quantitative research. 
    * Including "average treatment effects" 

7. **Contextualize. Localize**. Against "generalizability" as a key focus of quantitative research. 

8. **Caution with summarization** and measures of central tendency. The variance and the edges are as important as the means and medians. 