---
layout: note
num: 21
---

**Where is the infrapublishable work?**

In the academic world that I exist within, publishing a paper is rare. It is the terminus of what could be a many years long process with many twists and turns, possibly including myriad adventures through adjacent literatures, modes of analysis, ways of thinking and so on, before a "final form" is determined. In some cases, such intellectual adventures might _never_ lead to a publishable paper deemed "worthy" of sharing with the external world. There is a range of reasons -- both good and bad -- why a project might die; perhaps an important issue could never be resolved, perhaps the authors got bored, perhaps the results were null or unexpected and difficult to explain.

Regardless of whether a project ultimately "succeeds" or "fails", the point remains that academics regularly conduct a large amount of productive intellectual work -- what I will call _infrapublishable_ intellectual work (for lack of a better term)[^1] -- that never sees the light of day. I think that the hiding of infrapublishable intellectual work is bad for a number of reasons, which I will now elaborate.

First, and most obviously, the so-called "[file drawer problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publication_bias)" is one concrete issue that arises from the hiding of infrapublishable intellectual work. As is well-established elsewhere: if scientists fail to share (or publish) null results, this may lead to publication bias and ultimately an inaccurate reflection of empirical effects in the broader literature.

So this is bad both because:

1. It leads to publication bias. But also:
2. It leads to ineffecient investment by other researchers, who do not realize that a result has already been tested. (i.e. they have incomplete information)

There is also a less obvious analogue to this: what about ideas or studies that don't work out or are not possible for some _other_ (perhaps technical or pratcial) reason? For example, consider cases where a research direction *appears* interesting in viable but turns out not to be on further inspection. Perhaps a dataset that *appears* useful is not so useful after all for answering a particular question. Perhaps a useful study design turns out to be hard to get IRB approval for. There's a million possible--and often non-obvious--ways that a research project might *not* work out. If individual researchers walk down these paths but never share their explorations, then there is likewise bound to be inefficient investment overall. Other researchers might go down the same pathway again, not realizing it's already been explored, and waste time coming to the same conclusion. 

But also: sometimes, a research project that *seems* impossible for one researcher might turn out to be feasible for another researcher. Perhaps I work on a project and make a few good steps, but then get stuck. And because I get stuck I never share any of the work.

But what if there actually _was_ a solution to the problem I got stuck on? I just didn't figure it out for whatever reason. Well, another researcher reading about my steps might see the solution, and be able to drive the project to its conclusion. What's more, *that* person might not have thought of the first few steps that I _did_ complete successfully. And so, if I do not share the infrapublishable work, there is a "complete" intellectual product that could exist but never will due to my opacity.

Furthermore, even if there is no solution, it might be the case that the existing work could be valuable to others. For example, perhaps I have done the work of understanding or summarizing a literature; or some basic descriptive data analysis. These things are (or could be) useful to some set of people for a range of reasons, even if they are not "publishable". For example, they could aid in understanding; they could also provoke other ideas, other pathways of intellectual pursuit. For more experienced researchers, I also think that sharing this work can give junior researchers a helpful insight into the research process; otherwise, juniors must rely mainly on less-approachable "final" work to understand how to work. Hiding infrapublishable work deprives others of this value.

Finally, I think that there is individual value in sharing infrapublishable work:

- In practical terms, getting feedback on ideas sooner is often useful. 
- Sharing this work helps create a sense of progress, a clarity that productive work is being done, even if it does not yet lead to complete, "publishable" work.

And yes of course I understand there are various reasons why people don't share more "infrapublishable" work. These include things like not wanting to seem stupid by putting out an incomplete idea, and not wanting to be wrong. They also include wanting to get credit and not wanting others to "steal" your idea if it turns out to be a good one. I think that generally that these concerns are overblown; but also I wonder if alternative models of science might facilitate more sharing of infrapublishable work and ultimately be more productive in aggregate. I am not sure. 