---
layout: note
num: 22
---

I wish that intellectual and academic conversations were less often structured around what is right and what is wrong and more often structured around what is useful or illuminating or plausible about particular ideas or attitudes. I think it is perfectly possible to think an idea is both "wrong" and "useful" in certain ways. 

Among other things, I would like to see an intellectual world where "critique" is understood less antagonistically by the subject of criticism, and more as a potentially useful alternative way of seeing and understanding the situation, which can often illuminate or encourage new and different paths forward. 

Even if critics *view their own work* antagonistically or oppositionally, it doesn't need to be received by the criticized as such an undermining threat. Something that comes to mind is Thich Nhat Hanh's mantra "you are partially right". His invitation is to apply this kind of response to both personal praise and criticism -- whether it's coming from inside our own head or outside. The idea is to maintain a kind of balance and equananimity; neither do we want to get so caught up in our own perspective that we can't entertain alternatives, nor do we want to be so unstable and insecure that criticsm leaves us feeling wholly unworthy. So in response to both praise and criticsm we try to say: "you are partially right"; there are ways that I am good and also ways that I could be better, or simply different.

A related point concerns the centrality of "debate" as a dominant mode of having intellectual conversation between people who disagree (particularly online). In a debate, the goal is to "win", and in many cases (particularly online) to maximally embarass or "dunk on" your opponent. Debate of course precedes the internet. I think of the Oxford Union, where a "proposition" is fixed from the outset, teams are assembled to attack or defend, and then the audience votes on a winner. What's not available in this kind of format is the possibility that both sides might revise or deepen or reinterpret their own perspectives, or together identify new areas of middle ground or consensus. Instead, the whole enterprise is enforced as something strictly zero-sum. 