---
layout: note
num: 26
---

Some rough notes on Wim Wenders' *Paris, Texas*, which I just saw for the first time. The thing that really jumped out to me was this repeated theme of one-directional or mediated conversation.Some examples: 

* Travis starts out unspeaking. Others speak to him only. 
    * Travis sits in the back seat. Discomfort even being on the same plane.
* We see Travis do the dishes through the window.
* This parallelism scene where he walks back from school with son and they mimic each other
* He observes people from afar with binoculars.
* Travis one-way tape recording to son. 
* The one-way mirror between Travis and Jane
    * Travis turns around so that they both cannot see each other.
* Only in the emotional height of the movie is there this direct face-to-face. But still mediated through the glass. Travis cannot see her in person, unmediated. 
* In the end when mother and son reunite, again Travis sees from afar. Mediated. Separated. 

What is this about? A lot of thematic connection with direct emotional confronation or "being seen"? Fear of intimacy, direct observation; shame and avoidance as barriers to connection. Fear of confronting the past, past shame. And on the other side: duty and obligation; love and connection; accountability. 

A lot of these forms of mediated or one-directional communications wind up being *paths through* the shame and fear, to reach some kind of connection or intimacy, even if its imperfect. Even if it might be "better" to confront things face to face, there's an acceptance of personal imperfection: I cannot confront this head on, but at least here is some partial path forward to connection. 

Another set of themes have to do with identity and reality and expectations.
* Who is Travis? Who is the "real" father of son? What does it mean to be a father? Different "depths" of identity -- what does it "look like" to be a father (scene with magazine, scene with suit), to meet this obligation? Travis finds his own version of this in the end. 
* Father wanted mother to be from Paris. Joke that he came to believe. She was so shy.
* Themes around facsimilie -- looking like something but not being it. 

Confronting pasts and imaginging futures. And the differences. 
* Past: his trauma, the way he messed things up, his parents etc. 
* Future: living together in Paris. What is possible and what is not. Reality and possibility. 

Other things that jump out: 
* The repeated use of the slide guitar as main / only scoring. 
* Driving, road, desolateness of desert. From wandering in the desert to being found. Very mythic, biblical. Self-imposed isolation, alienation. 

