---
layout: note
num: 30
---


Notes on [*Drive*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Drive_(2011_film))  
* **Director**: Nicolas Winding Refn  
* **Watch date**: 1/11/25  
* **Rating**: 6.8/10  

**Notes**: 

* In general, use of sparsity and darkness to draw attention to contrasts. 
    * Moody / dark coloring generally --> but in moment where he kisses her -> bright contrast
    * A lot of silence; but then e.g. gunshot of husband in robbery huge break -- shocking. 
    * Slow pacing generally, but then these very forceful, shocking moments of violence. 
* A lot of silence in dialogue. Baseline sense of deliberateness in the Driver character. Controlled. Tho see below - moments of emotion through violence. 
    * Interesting part is how so much of the developing love/connection between Driver & Irene is non-verbal, through looks, small smiles etc. Probably more dialogue btw Driver & son than Driver & Irene.
* Use of shock. 
    * Gunshot of husband very shocking against sparse background. The sound especially jarring. Start of descent into violence.
    * Elevator scene, transition from love into extreme, brutal violence. 
* The Driver never named. Almost like a comic book character; wears same thing throughout whole movie. Only change is how jacket becomes more and more bloodied. 
    * No back story; appears out of nothing. What are his goals, his motivations? He is like a largely reactive character through the whole movie, I guess outside of his love interest. Does what he is forced to do, but sometimes with brutality and rage that goes beyond pure reaction. 
* Masculinity themes -- emotion and violence; doing "what has to be done"; "protector" motif; "gentleman" -- gentle towards her, but then capable of brutal violence.
* Emotion / connection only through physicality. One of the main ways we see Driver's emotional realities revealed is through enacted violence to protect/avenge Irene & Beneicio. 
    * E.g. shoving bullet down guy's throat. 
    * Brutal killing of guy in elevator. 
    * Physical anger at Shannon
* Other evidence of emotional connection is also mainly through physicality -- her hand on his in the car; kiss in elevator scene. 
* "[Scorpion and the frog](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Scorpion_and_the_Frog)" allusion - "The Scorpion and the Frog is an animal fable which teaches that vicious people cannot resist hurting others even when it is not in their own interests" 
    * "We cannot escape our nature" moral
    * The Driver wears a jacket with a scorpion embroidered on the back.
    * Interestingly, it's also about transportation -- the frog "drives" the scorpion across the river so to speak. 
* "Some heroes are real" tagline & real hero song; what to make of this? Is the Driver a "hero"? 
