---
layout: note
num: 31
---

Notes on [*Nightcrawler*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nightcrawler_(film)):  
* **Director**: Dan Gilroy
* **Watch date**: 1/12/25  
* **Rating**: 7/10  

**Notes**: 

* Lou like Randian hero or something -- completely morally indifferent, ultimately only guided by his ambition and power logics. Film is critique of these Randian values. [Nice summary of this from ChatGPT](https://chatgpt.com/share/67851e60-b580-800b-87e2-fd00551eafb7). 
* Creepiness of the patina of business/corporate-speak cheeriness -- e.g. greeting the news anchors etc. contrasted with the gruesomeness and moral repulsiveness of the actual work he is doing and his own moral derangement. 
    * For audience, gives feeling of like dark comedic absurdity. 
* Lou is obviously indifferent to / disconnected from the actual human suffering of the people is filming. 
    * E.g. when he arrives first to the crash and re-stages the bloody body to improve the shot. 
* The more morally deranged Lou becomes, the more he succeeeds. 
    * Culminates in not reporting the men who did the break in and staging the confronation with police, designing killing Rick. 
* Critique of capitalism
    * Market / power logics above all. Indifference to the truth, to morality. 
    * All the accountability mechanisms or characters who push back on this are ultimately weak / unsuccessful. 
        * Guy at station who cares about journalistic ethics.
        * Police
        * Rick 
    * Partly about the weakness of norms/ethics in the face of indifferent power logics. 
        * Lou does respond to power moves e.g. Rick but then escalates further. 
    * Lou ultimately succeeds / is rewarded for his derangement (final scene).
* Obviously also critique of news / media culture that is driven by economic attention logics. Race to the bottom -- Tim Wu *The Attention Merchants*. Ethically indifferent, indifferent to truth (e.g. when break-in turns out to be drug case); all that matters is what will get views / what will make the most gripping story. E.g. happy to play on racial/class-based fears, exploit tragedy etc. 
* "You don't understand people" idea -- different ways of understanding. 
    * Raw power/leverage/negotiation logics -- e.g. pay Rick the absolute minimum he can; vs. efficiency wages. 
* Honestly, some of the critical dimensions of the film feel a bit ham-fisted/obvious/on-the-nose -- e.g. Nina explicitly tells him she wants crime perpetrated by minorities, extending into the affluent suburbs. Explicitness of this contributes to the sense of moral derangement/void -- characters are fully aware, but don't care. But at the same time, weakens the critique? In real world, I think a lot of this kind of thing is perpetrated more subtly, and by characters who use rationalization & motivated reasoning to see themselves as good (or at least not bad). 
* Dark visual elements -- mostly night time. Dark, seedy kind of vibes. 
* Well-acted creepy Jake Gyllenhaal for sure. 