---
layout: note
num: 32
---

Notes on [*Children of Men*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Children_of_Men):  
* **Director**: Alfonso Cuarón
* **Cinematographer**: Emmanuel Lubezki
* **Watch date**: 1/13/25  
* **Rating**: 8.2/10  

**Notes**: 

* Very noticable handheld camera style of shooting.
    * A lot of instability, movement. Connects with the global instability portrayed in the film. 
    * Personally, I found kind of distracting, though maybe because I don't see things in this style too much. 
    * Raw, on the ground feeling -- like a documentary? But also not acknowledged in the story / by characters, so makes a bit incoherent --> e.g. in battle scene in particular, get blood splatter on camera lens, implying that camera is "there" in the scene. But at the same time, it's *not* there in the scene for the characters. 
    * Kind of like a fourth wall break? 
* People talk about a lot of very long shots, which I do think are really well done. 
* In general, immersion in the world seems to be a key goal; successful in this. 
* Ears ringing after explosion detail -- in the sound design; but also this bit about it being like the swan song of particular cells; "enjoy it" because it is the last time you will hear this frequency. 
* Scene in refugee camp in building very striking, emotionally-impactful. Theo tracks through war zone, following cries of child. Moment when fighting stops as all recognize the child. Theo and Kee slowly make their way out. 
* Various other noticeable cinematographic choices; e.g. I like scene at Jasper home where Theo stands in foreground, while other characters in blurry background around corner discuss his past.
* In general, world-building very rich and effective. Immersive. Exposited in a way that feels "real" and immersive vs. hokey/contrived/for the audience. E.g. contrast with the trope of news anchor explaining what happened. Here, a lot is present, but in the background, covered in passing as we follow Theo -- random political violence, different forms of protest / grafitti, religious factions etc. Many bits that make the world rich, even if they are never explored narratively.
    * E.g. billboard about mandatory fertility tests; religious factions; protest signs
    * Also get to see what characters react to as normal / abnormal -- e.g. refugee/immigration detention & violence apparently normalized for many, as Theo takes train and walks past people in cages etc. 
* From [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Children_of_Men#Hope_and_faith), Cuaron apparently has spoken explicitly about disdain for purely expository / narrrative filmmaking 
    * "Cuarón has attributed this unanswered question (and others in the film) to his dislike for the purely expository film: "There's a kind of cinema I detest, which is a cinema that is about exposition and explanations ... It's become now what I call a medium for lazy readers ... Cinema is a hostage of narrative. And I'm very good at narrative as a hostage of cinema." 
* Thematically, movie a lot about hope and common purpose. Is there something to live for in the future? Purpose/meaning/sacrifice in a bleak, oppressive world that seems to be ending. 
    * Sadness about death of baby Diego.
    * Belief in the "Tomorrow" ship, the Human Project.
    * Is it worth "fighting"? Theo's apparent apathy vs. the Fish activists. 
    * Infertility as a unique kind of "end of the world"; current generation is here, but apparently no future. 
    * Self-sacrifice / bigger purpose vs. apathy/nihilism/opportunism. E.g. Julian vs. Luke in terms of how they relate to Kee/her baby. 
    * Relates to themes of common-purpose -- are we "in it together"? Does it matter if we create a world that is "just"? Portrayal of refugee / immigration detention & injustice clearly connects to this theme. 
    * Theo of course evolves from apathy towards purpose throughout the film. 
        * One physicalized example -- his flask of booze which is throughout film; in opening scene he pours in his morning coffee -- a symbol of apathy, numbing to the world. But much later in the film, he pours on his hands to sanitize as he safely helps deliver Kee's baby. 
* Themes around gender and biology. Theo as reluctant male "protector" of younger woman. 
* Resonances with other science fiction: 
    * *The Handmaid's Tale* -- on infertility
    * *The Last of Us* -- this must have been inspired by *Children of Men*? Extreme parallels -- in post-apocalypic future, gruff male lead w/tragic past entrusted with protection of younger woman who carries biological seed of hope; must help her get to an uncertain promised future etc.
