---
layout: note
num: 37
---

Sometimes I get distracted by something out on the internet. Today, my friend sent me [this](https://www.tiktok.com/@topfloorbossjy?_t=ZP-8xrBpxFCEQh&_r=1) TikTok account which features a kid who claims to have dropped out of Stanford to "gamble full time". 

The kid makes goofy, fairly entertaining videos that seem likely to capture some attention.He's managed ~500k views and ~7000 followers in four videos. Commenters forecast the account's likely future success. 

Long story short, the account seems to be an effort at viral marketing for the kid's  "gamified consumer marketplace" (read: gambling app) which periodically features in the videos. This can be confirmed by looking at the kid's [personal website](https://www.justinjamesyang.com/). His relation to the app is never mentioned, and the app is never explicitly promoted. But he uses it in the videos, and then people write in the comments asking what it is, and he (or a friend) responds with a link to try it.

Looking slightly closer at the videos through this lens, their intentionality becomes clearer. Like all effective social content these days, they feel fairly unplanned and "authentic". But then also, you notice that in many shots he has a third-party person filming him; he has a lavalier mic which he holds in his hand like all good TikTokkers. There is planning and intention here.

There's other engagement bait around in the videos: he claims to have dropped out of Stanford to do this, a classic viral hook. He does seem to be a Stanford student, but I'm doubtful he dropped out. In [one vid](https://www.tiktok.com/t/ZP8hrfF3F/), he shows a screen recording where he inputs and "leaks" his credit card number. I assume the card information is fake, but it's good engagement bait and leads to plenty of comments: "Did bro really leak his credit card number?" etc. 

Finally, the "series" form of the content works well on TikTok ("day 1", "day 2" etc.). If a single vid pops up on my feed and I like it, there's a promise of more to come if I like and follow; per his account description: 

> this summer i can only survive by gambling
> stay tuned

Anyhow, maybe all of this is pretty obvious even if you might not notice it on a casual first watch. 

Something that this got me wondering about is whether anyone on TikTok really cares whether content like this is manufactured / manipulative / trying to promote something.

Sure, there is a bit of light deception and maybe it's technically illegal (because undisclosed?), but who believes anything on the internet these days, anyway? Taking things at face value online is a thing of the past -- it's for your parents who are credulously liking and commenting on obvious AI slop on Facebook. 

More broadly, it feels like a reasonable baseline assumption that everyone on social media is trying to capture your attention to sell you something on some level. There's a sense of apathy that results: as long as the content is entertaining, who cares if it is secretly (or not secretly) trying to sell me something? Everything is, after all.

I think that a lot of the most effective social media marketing content these days is some version of this. A charismatic creator makes content that can stand alone on its algorithmic attention-capturing merits. 

The exact mode of algorithmic success -- the manner in which the content is entertaining -- can be myriad, but the point is that often the creator is just behaving like any good influencer. And the product is there somewhere in the background somehow, available to be checked out by folks who are entertained by the content. 

A straightforward form of this is the generic "day in my life" lifestyle influencer who also happens to be an entrepreneur, or own a brand. 

An example I see sometimes is [this guy]([https://www.tiktok.com/@marcusmilione?_t=ZP-8xrFVu0srmR&_r=1]), who owns a clothing brand, but is attractive enough to draw eyeballs and makes lots of more general lifestyle content in addition to "behind the scenes" of running his business, and occasionally sharing new products. Another person I think of is [this person](https://www.tiktok.com/@taylorcapuano1?_t=ZP-8xrFmd3nWkp&_r=1), who incidentally went to the same high school as me. She similarly makes a variety of general interest content but also happens to be an enterpreneur with a product she occasionally discusses and promotes. 

A more corporate variant of this is the Duolingo social account which at some point started making chaotic, attention-grabbing content that had little to do with their actual product. 

These latter examples are more straightforward, and without any deception. Still, there's a similar logic underneath -- entertain me first and I will watch. I don't care what you are selling (unless I do), just don't annoy me with it.  