---
layout: note
num: 38
---

To avoid buying too much stuff I don't need or want, let's write down my set of hobbies and interests. On the one hand , I love experimenting with new things, sometimes things I have little idea about. 

On the other hand, I want to resist spending money on new things and accessories that I don't want or need. It's easy to fall into consumerism. It seems wise to balance genuine curiosity, novelty, and focus, control.

It's also useful to reflect on this for its own sake; what is interesting to me these days? Here's a kind of stream of consciousness answer from today, July 12 2025. 

1. **Bikes**. I like designing/building, maintaining them, learning about them, and riding them. This is the main way I get around town. It's also a good way to exercise. I love exploring the world through bikes and have been riding more gravel lately on my Bombora, which has been beautiful. Bikes as a form of expression and exploration. 
2. **Sewing**. I like sewing things. Especially bags and acessory type things. I include mending in this too. I like quilted and patchwork type things; things with a bit of texture; things that repurpose older things in to something new. I like patterns, especially florals, but not in an overwhelming way. Visual mending and decorative patches are nice. I have a few projects that are sitting partially-finished; it'd be nice to get to those more regularly. 
3. **Generative art / pen plotter** & **other intersections of tech & art**: visual art mainly, but sometimes other things at this intersection interest me. I think I am most interested in the hybridity here; things that involve both some technical component, and some hand-made component. I like to play and experiment at this intersection. Recently, I haven't been doing too much in this area, but it ebbs and flows.

More occassional interests and things I spend money on: 

4. **Synthesizer / groovebox / samplers**: On and off, I've been playing with pocket operators and my liven lofi. I don't know much what I am doing with it, but it's fun to play with. It would be cool to learn more, but also sometimes it's fun to just experiment. 
5. **Clothes / fashion / personal style etc.**: I have a general interest in personal expression through clothes, jewelry and these kinds of things. Connects to interests in sewing and such. I like going to vintage stores, thrifting etc. Maybe someday I will get more into tattoos. 
6. **Soccer**: this is my main interest in terms of sports. I am especially interested in the USMNT and how its players fare at club level. I am not strongly attached to a team -- I'm mostly a neutral fan of the sport; however, this past year I was enjoying and supporting Barcelona, who were generally fun to watch. This is probably the club I feel most attached too -- I like the style of soccer it represents, and the team is really entertaining currently. In general, I think La Liga is a nice league to follow. I also follow the Premier League. I like the Total Soccer Show podcast.
7. **Cinema / Movies**: I like to go to the Brattle; I like to watch and think about movies. I have notes about specific movies on this site. Watching movies intentionally is fun and more rewarding than watching passively. 

Things I'd like to explore more or get back into (maybes): 

7. **Photography & video**: I sometimes make videos for social media. These can be a fun way to connect with other people with similar interests and also a form of personal expression. When I was much younger, I enjoyed photography a lot, doing things like developing my own photos, submitting to photo contests, etc. I've been thinking about getting back into this, since it seems to have a nice synergy with cycling. I like the idea of taking nice photos on my rides as a mode of documentation. 
8. **Music**: The last ~10 years I haven't really been listening to that much music. Music is around for me like everyone, but it's not something I've been too into really. If I have headphones on, I'm usually listening to white noise for focus (while working), or a podcast if I'm doing chores. However, more recently, I've been interested in listening to more music. This connects a bit to (4) above. What kind of music? I think synth pop / dream pop kinds of things I want to explore more; I've been listening to Beach House and things from that era. Unrelated, I've also been listening to Ethel Cain the last few weeks because Jesse recommended her. In general, like for movies, I think that music is more fun when you I attention to it -- what do I like and not like about a particular album? What is interesting? What is drawing mhy attention? Like many of these things, it's about better and better developing my understanding of my own taste. Creative mindfulness.
9. **Health and fitness**: I feel like this hasn't been as much of a focus for a while, at least not directly. I'm often thinking a bit about it in the background, and generally don't think I do horribly on it. Still, I've been trying to think a bit more about it the past few weeks. Pay more attention to what I am eating -- do less snacking / junk eating, and more preparing real meals. Someday, I'd like to get back into lifting weights; I know from the past that that is something that is enjoyable for me; however, I don't really love the gym -- neither the schlep of it, nor the performative/public environment of it. However, lifting weights itself is enjoyable in its simplicity and clarity of progression. It feels good in the body to do, both during and after, and its satisfying to feel like you are getting stronger. I always imagine that someday if/when I have a house, I'd like to have a garage gym. I think that a set of weights, a squat rack, and maybe a bench would be pretty much all that's needed for most things. Anyhow, I guess I am thinking about trying to re-initiate some of this in my current life -- re-join a gym maybe; I'm not sure. I could do something like join the climbing gym also, which has a weight room. I'll have to think about this; in general, it seems good to invest in.

Anyhow, that seems like a pretty fair list of things I am interested in or curious about these days. I am not too sure what conclusions to draw from this, but it feels helpful and grounding to reflect on it a bit. Maybe I will revisit again in a few months, and see what might have changed. 


