---
layout: note
num: 41
---

## Maintenance Session Logs

I started going to [these](https://themaintainers.org/monthly-maintenance-sessions/) monthly "maintenance sessions" organized by The Maintainers. In this post I keep some notes on these sessions. 

### October 2025

In this session, I mainly worked on some daily chores, and started reorganizing some of my bathroom bins. I decided that I should purchase some new organizing infrastructure both for the bathroom and elsewhere, and so moved into perusing the container store and such online.

I thought about the emotional challenge of "neverending" maintenance tasks. This is an almost definitional feature of a certain category of maintenance tasks -- chores that have to be done over and over, upkeep that keeps infrastructure working as intended, and so on. There's clearly many ways to reframe here, but also seems important to notice the kind of overwhelm that can come along with this sisyphean dimension of maintenance. A related thing I was noticing is that when I set out to do these kind of chore tasks for a while, I almost always get more done than I expect to. Maybe this is a symptom of some level of overwhelm. 

In the discussion portion of the session, we talked about competing philosophies around clutter and what is worth "keeping around" vs. purging or throwing out etc. 

On the one hand, there is a set of philosophies that value holding on to things. One reason to hold on to things is that there's always a chance that you will find a use for it later! Someone mentioned the joy of having the perfectly sized recycled storage jar when you need it. There's a nice spirit of reuse and conservation here. I also thought about the satisfaction of having the exact right tool for the job when you need it, which is satisfying in its own right, but also allows you to stay in the flow of a project in many cases. 

On the other hand, there's a set of philosophies that emphasize the value of minimalism and only keeping around the things you really need or value. I think about Marie Kondo as a key example. Certainly, there is a wisdom in these approaches too, with their emphasis on thoughtful intentionality.

I don't think there's a right answer here for me, but it's interesting to pay attention to these different perspectives and think about how they are (or perhaps in some ways *are not*) in tension. 

### September 2025

Today, I worked on cleaning my kitchen; my biggest move was bringing a table down to the storage unit, moving some other unusued things into storage areas. 

Someone mentioned *Maintainamorphosis* -- A portmanteau of 'maintain' and 'metamorphosis' mantainamorphosis denotes the simultaneous preservation and innovation of an item or idea. From Virgil Abloh. 

I thought about the distinction between "shallow" and "deep" cleaning/maintenance. L. reframed as it being a point about considering the "systems" of maintenance which I agreed with -- proceeding within the existing systems/infrastructures that have been set up vs. engaging in the "system-level" work of revising the infrastructure, setting up new systems etc. 

I think there is also something about maintenance work that *can* be systematized vs. maintenance work that cannot. Ongoing, predictable, repeatable tasks vs. more infrequent, one-off problems to be solved. The latter often requires a bit more thought and work. It's also not always the same as "setting up a better system". 

For example, in the last session, I'd spent a bunch of time shredding unhelpful junk mail type stuff from my financial accounts. After that, I was prompted to figure out how to actually go in and change my settings in the account to "paperless" so that they will actually stop sending me the junk. This required some work because I was actually not able to do it myself and had to email the admin and re-set up my account and then finally I could change it. So this is kind of like a "systemic" fix to a maintenance task, but it's also not quite the same as "setting up a better ongoing system of maintenance". It's more like "addressing the root cause". 

We talked a bit more about joyful vs. laborious maintenance. 

A. talked about maintenance and class; the privilege of disposability; throwing things away as a class signifier.

### August 2025

I went to a monthly "maintenance session" organized by the Maintainers today. It was a really lovely a friendly space full of people who are interested to think more about maintenance and repair. 

As I was going off to do my maintenance tasks, I was thinking about how some maintenance tasks are enjoyable for me, while others are not so much. 

For example, I love riding my bike and I enjoy the process of cleaning and maintaining my bike. 

It's like the perfect maintenance task -- the bike gets covered very superficially in bits of dirt and gunk when I ride in the forest. This dirt is easy to clean off with a bit of water or solution, and the reward is a beautiful bike, that again looks and feels good to ride. 

Repairing clothes is also a maintenance task that is kind of fun and satisfying. It's grounding and also rewarding. 

But other sorts of maintenance tasks are not so fun or rewarding. They are easier to avoid, less satisfying. The example I was focused on today was cleaning out a pile of junk mail on my desk. This involves a bunch of shredding and sorting through a big mess of things. My shredder is not very good and so it's slow and always overheating and getting jammed. 

And so the question I was thinking about generally is: 

* Why are some sorts of repair and maintenance tasks more fun and rewarding than others? 
* How much does this have to do with the tasks themselves, vs. other features of our relation to them? 
    * E.g. the infrastructure of maintenace -- the tools, routines, systems, that we have to do the cleaning or repair. My bike cleaners and brushes; my bike stand. Vs. my inconvenient scanner. 
    * Attitudes towards these tasks and what they mean or signify is also surely part of it.
    * How might I reorient myself and my systems to make it easier e.g. to handle this unpleasant junk mail maintenance task? What is the scope for agency there? 