---
layout: note
num: 42
---

A brainstorm free association list of things to do with NFC tags.

* Put them in clothes seems interesting, though I am not sure the purpose really. But they can be sewed between two pieces of fabric and scanned through. Seems like a nice way to hold. 
* Could sew them into different places on a single piece of fabric, use to create some sort of interactivity. 
* Some sort of public instrument or interactive sculpture that is controlled by a phone, accessed through an NFC tag. NFC => website, which then can connect to some other thing that has internet access. I also wonder about the option to have the tag connect you to a wifi or bluetooth network locally --> maybe emitted by the target object, which means the target does not need to have internet access otherwise? 
* Just a poem that comes up when you scan, delivered as raw text. Get a fortune. Get a memory. Get a reminder. 
* Tags in particular places, opportunities for learning or imagination about the place. I was thinking of the guy who uses AI to re-imagine local spaces as being more bike friendly. FOr example, I am standing by a highway or some other unsightly thing, I scan the tag, and i am sent to a website with an image of what that exact place would look like without the highway, or what it looked like 10,000 years ago, long before cities and modern tech and so on. 
* Many similar variants of this idea -- some inspiration from land acknowledgement. Connection to a place: what or who used to be here? 
* An offering to see the place where you are...differently. 
* Information offering, in natural setting? Scan this tag, learn about this species of tree or plant or whatever. Learn about what is at issue here. 
* I like the idea of a digital guest book in random non-standard places. Guest book in the middle of nature somewhere. Upload a photo, leave a message, whatever. 
* Art project about a place over time. You scan the thing, and it asks you to upload a photo of the place you are currently in; then you get to see all the other photos of the place that other people have uploaded. Something about change, seasonality, attention.
* Funny variant: put this at my basketball arcade. You scan it and upload your best score. A global leaderboard. Including a photo. Yess. 
* Feedback oriented guest book? Feedback on what? 
* Share how you are feeling guest book. See how others felt when they were here. 
* Was thinking about that project that I think is called traffic cam photobooth or something. Could be a jarring to do something like that, draw attention to surveillance -- you scan the tag and suddenly there is a video feed of you. 
* In general, the idea of there being a hidden camera somewhere is maybe interesting. E.g. you scan, the photo takes a picture, sends to LLM and asks for a compliment or a poem about you, displays on the URL. 
* Values/feelings I like in all of these are whimsy, surprise, a reward for curiosity, willingness to pay attention. A offering to reframe, see something differently. A new viewpoint. Appreciation of a particular place. Place as a connection to other people who have been here.
* I like the idea of leaving notes, but maybe in digital form. I think of the scene from Perfect Days where he plays tic tac toe with someone. A site of connection, anonymous. 
* You scan and it's just a photo of the sky above you, the leaves. In invitation to look up, notice something beautiful nearby. A photo of the animals that live near here, an invitation to remember the other inhabitants of a space. 
* I am curious about if there are ways to do something more interactive. What other information is there if you scan the tag? I guess location is really the big one, it makes sense to focus on. If you scan this and it is in a place, you are in that place too.
* I'm surprised people don't use these more for marketing and stuff. Leave a geurilla ad targeted at people who go to a particular kind of place (like a cafe). In general, leaving stuff semi-hidden at cafes does seem fun. Little geurilla pieces of art. 
* Tag to connect to wifi is a very practical one. 
* Tap to be reminded of something. 
* On Android you can open SMS. Cute simple idea: open a text message with the body populated: "I love you", or "you are very important to me" or "I am grateful to have you in my life". I think this might be possible to implement on iOS with a website that has button which can redirect to messages app. I am not 100% sure though. 