---
layout: note
num: 43
---

Notes on *Middlesex*

* I find the opening interesting, narrated from the perspective of Calliope "pre-fetal". Why? A preoccupation with origins? Where did I come from? How did I come to be the way that I am? There's thematic exploration of different sorts of agency and knowing in this process of creation. Agency of god, agency of parents -- the thermometer etc. -- randomness (the weather etc.), even of the "miscreant" genes hiding out on chromosome number 5, siphoning off an enzyme, which "complicates my life". Narratives of control, or not. Science vs. traditional wisdom, religion. 
* Memorable imagery: "An infinite number of possible selves crowded the threshold, me among them but with no guaranteed ticket". Narrator in the anteroom of existence. 
* Memorable "rewind" imagery, rolling the story all the way back. Themes about the question of where does a story begin? With the silkworm box and gender discernment, then back, then forward, then "all the way" back. 
* Confrontations of tradition, traditional ways of knowing, and "modern", scientific understandings. Flipping back and forth between interpretations. 
* Floating narrator, sometimes mysteriously. Looking back from the future, can inhabit anyone's perspective. The story of the doctor, which comes into intersection with Lefty. 
* Hints of who the narrator is, revealed through interests in the story, history. Vignette of the present. Historical contingency as an important aspect of making identity, self-understanding. 

Words: 
* firmament: the heavens or the sky, especially when regarded as a tangible thing.
    * Can be used in metaphorical way: "she was a rising star in the political firmament"
* obstreperous: noisy and difficult to control.
    * Commonly applied to children, little boys. Negative generally?
* vitreous: like glass in appearance or physical properties. glassy. 
    * There's also the "vitreous humor" in the eye -- clear gel between lens and the retina. 
* caique: a light rowboat used on the Bosporus
    * Or "caïque" 
* depilated: having had the hair removed. The removal of hair, wool, or bristles by chemical or mechanical methods.
* emollient: a preparation that softens the skin.
    * "The coconut derivative in this body wash is an emollient that helps condition the skin" 