---
layout: note
num: 45
---

Notes on [*The Master*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Master_(2012_film)):  
* **Director**: Paul Thomas Anderson
* **Watch date**: 10/11/25
* **Rating**: 5.8/10  

**Notes**: 

* Was not a huge fan of this; struggled to find an entrypoint into it, for lack of a better way of putting it. Maybe that is part of the intention. 
* A lot of the film sits in a kind of discomfort of diffferent forms, light aversion, awkwardness, sometimes erratic, sexual. A lot of sexual under and overtones throughout. But I am not sure what to make of them, really. 
* The acting is clearly very strong -- especially Phoenix and Hoffman. Hoffman especially is memorable in his physicality. A strange character, even in his movement, the way he looks, laughs, moves through space. Hoffman a portrait of that kind of manipulative, narcisstic leader. 
* The relationship between the two men is clearly central and very strange; clearly a kind of affection for both, but also twisted, uncomfortable. Audience bears uncomfortable relationship to both the two men and to their relationship. The other characters conspire in this latter aspect. I guess both in their ways have both redemptive and also repulsive qualities. Perhaps that is part of the uneasiness of the film's feeling. 
* Hoffman is a narcisstic cult leader and charlatan, but also seems genuinely curious, invested and caring in some ways. Loyal in some ways. Freddie is erratic, violent, trapped in vices, but also loyal, joyful in some ways. 
* Thematics around control and freedom, mainly. Key focal scene and quotation in the school in England -- if you find a way not to serve a master, any master, you will be the first. Themes around trauma and the past. PTSD, "time travel", unpacking, "processing". Freddie hung up on Doris. This kind of flip-side of "trauma" that is "devotion"; members of the Cause must be part of it for a billion years or whatever Amy Adams says. 
* The way the scenes of the film are pieced together also memorable; it kind of drifts across scenes with looser connections, implications. Not particularly jarring or incoherent, but patchwork. Freddie is here, then there; he is part of the cult, then out. Some time has passed. Did he simply leave on the motorcycle and never come back? Sometimes, elements of apparent hallucination. 