---
layout: note
num: 48
---

Notes on [*Looper*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Looper_(film)):  
* **Director**: Rian Johnson
* **Watch date**: 11/23/25
* **Rating**: 7.5/10  

**Notes**: 

* I enjoyed this for what it was. I was looking for a good, easy to watch, entertaining sci-fi / action type of movie, and this hit the spot for that kind of thing. Better than "bad", with a creative premise, well-constructed narrative, and a good cast for this type of thing. 
* Time-travel stuff always a little funky if you think about it too hard, and this case no exception, which is okay if just trying to enjoy the movie. I thought it was a little funny and clumsy when Bruce Willis' character is insisting emphatically that JGL not think too hard about the time travel rules or how it all works. He yells something like "IT DOESN'T MATTER", which is clearly intended for the audience. 
* Still, they use the time travel elements in somewhat interesting ways, not least in the general "Looper" concept. Creative. The concept of the rainmaker who is (or is not) traumatized by a Looper (Willis) from the future who is trying to prevent his existence. This has a greek tragedy kind of irony, like Oedipus or something.  
* Is there anything deeper in the themes here? A little. Ideas around the many paths that a life can take, depending often on the interventions of others. Different sorts of wisdom and ignorance that arise out of these different paths. E.g. even though Willis' character is older, wiser and reformed in some ways, he's also morally inept in others, willing to take the life of an innocent child to redirect even a possible future. But this all shaped by his path. 