---
layout: note
num: 50
---

Notes on [*Gravity*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gravity_(2013_film)):  
* **Director**: Alfonso Cuaron
* **Watch date**: 11/25/25
* **Rating**: 8/10  

**Notes**: 

* I thought this was good. Definitely engaging, pulls you forward. 
* Some really nice visual shots and cinematographic choices. One that was particularly notable for me is when Bullock's character is trying to get into one of the hatches and the space station is being torn to shreds behind her by the cloud of debris, and then eventually explodes. The visuals of earth are also nice. 
* Also some cool choices with sound. The silence of space. The scene where she is bobbing under water after landing, the sound cutting in and out. 
* Kind of unique as a movie that is so singularly focused on a single character for the most part. Obviously you have the relationship between her and Clooney's character running through, but a lot of the movie is really just Bullock and her character's arc. 
* Is her character's arc interesting/meaningful? The main/obvious thing we see is her growth & change in attitude inspired by Clooney's character -- from insecure, doubtful etc. in the face of challenges, but then more confident, more willing to try and "go for it" and try to make things work, after her vision of Clooney at rock bottom. I guess this is like the core thematic of the movie, a version of "get busy living or get busy dying" in the face of difficulties. We have the backdrop of her personal adversity too.
* Clooney's character is important but ultimately one-dimensional? Mostly there to play this role in Bullock's arc, and represent this kind of good-natured calm under pressure attitude -- working with what life gives you, and not getting discouraged. A portrait of a version of resillience; not overcoming by force of will exactly but by continuing to ride the waves, work with the situation you are given, do the best you can, see the positive things, believe ("I am going to make it"). 

**Reading some criticism**

* Notes on evolutionary themes in the movie; hm. 
* Interesting via wiki: "Robert Barron in The Catholic Register summarizes the tension between Gravity's technology and religious symbolism. He said, "The technology which this film legitimately celebrates ... can't save us, and it can't provide the means by which we establish real contact with each other. The Ganges in the sun, the Saint Christopher icon, the statue of Budai, and above all, a visit from a denizen of heaven, signal that there is a dimension of reality that lies beyond what technology can master or access ... the reality of God"". 
    * Not sure if this is the conclusion I drew exactly, but I agree that there is certainly this religious dimension in the film, and some notion that it's not the technology which is savior, it's human spirit and ingenuity (perhaps inspired by some of these religious aspects) that sustains us. There's also this moment in reference to prayer from Bullock ("no one taught me how"), and also her "thank you" when she finally reaches land. 
* It is interesting to think about how technology is portrayed in the film. Ultimately as something fairly brittle, limited, a site of catastrophe in the face of the unexpected. Communications break down, systems are not robust, fuel/oxygen runs out etc. Yet also a kind of portrait of multistability in the STS sense -- technology meant for one purpose can be used for another ("landing is launching" or whatever the line is). And that this kind of multistability is not a mistake, but a kind of inspiration -- a site of ingenuity in unexpected circumstances. 