---
layout: note
num: 54
---

Learning to use the Breville espresso machine.

# Day 1

I'll start with 18 grams of espresso. 

Single wall filter, the larger size one. 

Beans are the bulletin blend. 

I use middle of the "Fine" setting for the grinder. 

Result: From button press to final drip was about 24 seconds. Pretty good, maybe a little short. 

Next i could grind a hair finer I think? I'll try measuring more stuff too to understand.

# Day 2

18 grams but spilled a bit. 

I made it more fine grind. I spilled a bit when adding to the filter; need a better method for this.

Result: extracted a bit too quickly. Like 20 seconds. Also too much came out like 45 grams. 

Suggests: I coulld go finer, maybe i didn't tamp well enough? Doesn't really make sense in relation to yesterday, suggests inconsistency. 

On some research, the internet coffee snobs actually seem to not be a big fan of my grinder for espresso. It's too inconsistent they say and lacks proper adjustment. I may try to take a closer look at that. 

Anyway, I tried making an iced americano today. It was drinkable to me at least. 

# Day 3

I tried going up to 18.5 grams; I'm at the very low edge of "fine" setting on the Capresso grinder. I'm doing RDT before grinding to hopefully make it easier to get things into the portafilter.

Results: 

* Full extraction was about 40-41 grams. Not sure if I should be trying to stop the shot early or just dial it until it naturally stops at right amount. 
* Extraction time was low 20s. 
* Pull started around 11-13 seconds.
* Pretty nice crema to my eye.

Overall it's pretty decent, though maybe i can grind even a bit finer.

I found [this](https://honestcoffeeguide.com/capresso-infinity-grind-settings/?utm_source=chatgpt.com) chart about grind size for the Capresso which indeed suggests I ought to be going finer. I am around 4-5 currently. 

Capresso [suggests](https://www.capresso.com/media/wysiwyg/Infinity_IB_Eng_OL_828_.pdf?srsltid=AfmBOoo6w4S_Mr5LbRicpzjsLaKV5PUuWiq7TQWrHNVKVbye3ke-zpEm&utm_source=chatgpt.com) fine or extra fine. 

# Day 4

I turned the grinder a bit finer. It's now at the "extra fine" setting near the top end of that. 18g of espresso again. Overall the pull was pretty nice. Extraction time around 28-29 seconds, with 35g of coffee resulting, just about 2:1, without even stopping the shot early. Solid crema to my eye.

I am having it in americano today; pretty smooth and tasty.

Second round today and things were on the too fine side. Extraction was slower and total yield less (like 25-26g). Not sure exactly why. Could be that the grinder is just inconsistent? I also lost a bit when loading into the portafilter.

# Day 5

Now I have grinder right between Fine and Extra Fine. Results are pretty good. 18g. Pull starts around 13 seconds and ends mid 20s. Extraction weight right around 36g. I got a funnel thing to make it easier to load the portafilter. I am not sure if this is a bit late for the coffee to start coming out. Really I should just be paying more attention to taste, but I don't notice too much difference when I put everything in iced americano or a milk drink or something. 