---
layout: note
num: 57
---

Notes on [*Magellan*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magellan_(film)):  
* **Director**: Lav Diaz
* **Watch date**: 2/11/26
* **Rating**: 6.3/10  

**Notes**: 

* Some interesting aspects, but I think overwhelmed by it just being too long. Requires a lot of patience to get all the way through.  
* A lot of really beautifully-framed and composed static shots. I do think there's something really grounding about the static shot that has a bit of motion in the frame -- just the smoke of the fire coming across the frame, or the rain falling, or a man slowly searching through a pile of bodies. It does feel importantly different from even a photograph to me. Like sitting with a place, less frozen, more real. 
* The word I kept coming to in the theater was "raw". All the portrayal of these historical acts felt raw, un-inflated, un-dramatized. Just some people doing people things -- praying, fighting, having sex, dying etc. As audience, you're alway a bit distanced from it. Shots pulled back, not much interiority on the characters. The emotional tone of all of it felt very flat, even as lots of different things are happening. Like observing these events from afar. The images of different forms of prayer I think will be memorable to me, and also the long shots after various forms of fighting, with bodies strewn. I do appreciate some aspect of the realism of this, maybe. Just sit with this full reality, nothing abbreviated for the sake of storytelling, say. Just: here is this whole moment of what happened. 
* Relatedly, all the pacing, of course, is very slow. Which is an interesting thing to sit with. In some parts, especially early on, I did find it pretty nice and meditative. It's like a unique space to provide to audience -- to sit together with some image for a while.
* There's obviously a lot to unpack in the film about colonialism and conquest and how it portrays the indigenous perspective. I found myself thinking about the STS idea of "symmetry". 

Some interesting discussion in [this](https://www.screenslate.com/articles/language-static-shots-conversation-lav-diaz) piece. 

> The static shot is my language. I always go with a very journalistic way of seeing things where I'm just observing. I don't want to impose things. I don’t want to have the coverage of movie-making we often see. It's been overused. It's still valid, but I just want to be the observer.

Also some interesting commentary on the portrayal of Nature in his visual language and in the film more broadly. 